README.md, before:

# Koodi101 Project Template

## Forking and cloning the repository

Start by forking the repository

> If you work in a group, only one person needs to fork the repository.
> The others need to be members of the repository. See [collaborating with other users](#collaborating)

Then clone the forked repository using SSH

    git clone git@github.com:<user>/koodi101-template.git

> When you use SSH to clone a repository, you need a [private key](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent) on your account which is authorized to pull (read) the repository.
>
> Using SSH allows you to push (write) to the repository without providing you username and password! Handy, right?

## Running the project

Start by going to the cloned repository in a terminal

    cd koodi101-template

> Note that for the environment variables to load correctly, you can't be in a subfolder of koodi101-template

Then build the docker images and start the services

    docker-compose build
    docker-compose up

Or with a single command

    docker-compose up --build

> Hit Ctrl+C to stop the processes

<details>
<summary> Optionally you can run the process in the background </summary>
<br>

Add `-d` to the docker-compose commands.

    docker-compose build
    docker-compose up -d

Or with a single command

    docker-compose up --build -d

> `-d` comes from the word _detached_

To see if the project is running

    docker-compose ps

To stop the running background processes and remove the built images

    docker-compose down --rmi all --remove-orphans

> If the processes are not running `docker-compose down` also removes the _containers_ and images

If you don't want to remove the images, you can just run

    docker-compose down

</details>

## Running the project with only Node.js

Prerequisites

- [nodejs](http://nodejs.org)

### Backend

Go to the `backend` folder using `cd`, install the dependencies and start the backend node process

    cd backend
    npm install
    npm run dev

The backend is now running in [http://localhost:9000](http://localhost:9000/api/greeting)

### Frontend

In another terminal, go to the `frontend` folder, install its dependencies and start the frontend node process

    cd frontend
    npm install
    npm start

The frontend is now running in [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)

## Collaborating

Collaboration is the heart of Open Source software development in GitHub.

> Only the owner of the forked repository in your group needs to add the collaborators

After creating/forking a repository, owner may add collaborators to it alternatively in the GitHub repository page by clicking `settings -> collaborators` or by going to the web page by the following URL where `<username>` is replaced by a repository owner's username

    https://github.com/<username>/koodi101-template/settings/access

And, by searching usernames of other students (collaborators), owner can invite them as group members to allow them pushing (making changes) to the repository.

Upon inviting your group members, they will receive the invitation via email. Only after accepting the invitation will they be able to push to the repository.

Commit message:

Add collaborating demo gifs to README

README.md, after:

# Koodi101 Project Template

## Forking and cloning the repository

Start by forking the repository

> If you work in a group, only one person needs to fork the repository.
> The others need to be members of the repository. See [collaborating with other users](#collaborating)

Then clone the forked repository using SSH

    git clone git@github.com:<user>/koodi101-template.git

> When you use SSH to clone a repository, you need a [private key](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent) on your account which is authorized to pull (read) the repository.
>
> Using SSH allows you to push (write) to the repository without providing you username and password! Handy, right?

## Running the project

Start by going to the cloned repository in a terminal

    cd koodi101-template

> Note that for the _environment variables_ to load correctly, you can't be in a subfolder of koodi101-template

Then build the docker images and start the services

    docker-compose build
    docker-compose up

Or with a single command

    docker-compose up --build

> Hit Ctrl+C to stop the processes

<details>
<summary> Optionally you can run the process in the background </summary>
<br>

Add `-d` to the docker-compose commands.

    docker-compose build
    docker-compose up -d

Or with a single command

    docker-compose up --build -d

> `-d` comes from the word _detached_

To see if the project is running

    docker-compose ps

To stop the running background processes and remove the built images

    docker-compose down --rmi all --remove-orphans

> If the processes are not running `docker-compose down` also removes the _containers_ and images

If you don't want to remove the images, you can just run

    docker-compose down

</details>

## Running the project with only Node.js

Prerequisites

- [nodejs](http://nodejs.org)

### Backend

Go to the `backend` folder using `cd`, install the dependencies and start the backend node process

    cd backend
    npm install
    npm run dev

The backend is now running in [http://localhost:9000](http://localhost:9000/api/greeting)

### Frontend

In another terminal, go to the `frontend` folder, install its dependencies and start the frontend node process

    cd frontend
    npm install
    npm start

The frontend is now running in [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)

## Collaborating

Collaboration is the heart of Open Source software development in GitHub.

> Only the owner of the forked repository in your group needs to add the collaborators

After creating/forking a repository, owner may add collaborators to it alternatively in the GitHub repository page by clicking `settings -> collaborators` or by going to the web page by the following URL where `<username>` is replaced by a repository owner's username

    https://github.com/<username>/koodi101-template/settings/access

And, by searching usernames of other students (collaborators), owner can invite them as group members to allow them pushing (making changes) to the repository.

Upon inviting your group members, they will receive the invitation via email. Only after accepting the invitation will they be able to push to the repository.

### Collaborating example

- Niklash on is making changes to [`src/index.jsx`](src/index.jsx), committing them and finally pushing them to GitHub.

![computer1](computer1.gif)

> Git commands used:
>
> - `git add`
> - `git diff`
> - `git status`
> - `git commit -m "message"`
> - `git push`

- Severi is then pulling the changes and viewing them.

![computer1](computer2.gif)

> Git commands used:
>
> - `git pull`
> - `git show`
